JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
a search for answers after an
EgyptAir flight
crashes in the Mediterranean
with 66 people
on board.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Thursday:
Bernie Sanders intensifies the
fight with
the Democratic Party, but will
his decision
to stay hurt the party's chance
for unification?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And former
executives get a
chance to reboot their careers
by solving
some of the world's biggest
problems, thanks
to a Harvard fellowship.
ROSABETH MOSS KANTER, Harvard
Business School:
We said, hey, here is a
leadership force,
and if we could only deploy them
to work on
these pressing problems of
water, and climate,
and health, maybe that's a
perfect match.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: An airliner is
lost with 66
people on board, setting off a
frantic hunt
for clues.
As the day ended in the Eastern
Mediterranean
Sea, the fate of a missing
Egyptian Air passenger
plane was anything but clear.
And there was
the suggestion of a terrorist
connection.
John Yang begins our coverage.
JOHN YANG: There was heavy
security at Charles
de Gaulle Airport outside Paris,
where EgyptAir
Flight 804 took off last night
headed for
Cairo, where today families of
those on board
left the airport in a daze.
MAN (through translator): They
don't have
any information. They don't have
specific
information.
JOHN YANG: The Greek defense
minister said
all seemed normal as the plane
flew through
his nation's airspace before
vanishing from
radar.
PANOS KAMMENOS, Greek Defense
Minister (through
translator): At 3:37, the plane,
which was
10 to 15 miles inside Egyptian
airspace, at
37,000 feet, made a 90-degree
turn to the
left, and then a 360-degree turn
towards the
right, descending from 37,000
feet to 15,000
feet. The picture we had was
lost at 10,000
feet.
JOHN YANG: Debris was spotted in
the Mediterranean
near the Greek island of
Karpathos, although
it wasn't clear if it was from
Flight 804.
Egypt's aviation minister
pointed to terrorism.
SHERIF FATHY, Egyptian Aviation
Minister:
If you analyze the situation
properly, the
possibility of having a
different action or
having a terror attack is higher
than the
possibility of having a
technical...
JOHN YANG: This is only the
latest in a series
of incidents involving Egyptian
aviation.
In March, a man wearing a fake
suicide belt
hijacked EgyptAir Flight 181 to
Cyprus. And
last October, a Russian airliner
exploded
over the Sinai Desert after
taking off from
Sharm el-Sheikh. All 224 people
aboard died
in what Egyptian officials said
was a terrorist
attack.
In the past two days, the plane
lost today
flew round-trips between Cairo
and Eritrea
and Cairo and Tunis. Egyptian
President Abdel
Fattah El-Sisi convened an
emergency meeting
of advisers. So did French
President Francois
Hollande.
In Brussels, Secretary of State
John Kerry
expressed U.S. condolences.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: The United
States is providing assistance
in the search
effort, and relevant authorities
are doing
everything they can to try to
find out what
the facts are of what happened
today.
JOHN YANG: The U.S. Navy
deployed a P-3 Orion
reconnaissance aircraft to help
in the search
for the wreckage, which could
hold vital clues
to what brought down Flight 804.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tonight, an
Egyptian Air official
said that no debris from the
missing airplane
has been found, correcting an
earlier statement.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the day's
other news:
The Senate approved a bipartisan
plan to fight
the Zika virus totaling $1.1
billion. It came
after Republicans in the House
passed a separate
bill last night that costs $622
million. The
White House says President Obama
can accept
the Senate compromise, but would
veto the
House measure because it doesn't
provide enough
money.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The House of
Representatives
did battle today over gay
rights. Democrats
offered an amendment to protect
lesbians,
gays, bisexual, and transgender
employees
from discrimination by federal
contractors.
It failed by one vote.
The floor erupted with boos and
shouts of
shame, as Democrats accused
Republicans of
prolonging the process until
enough members
switched their yes votes to no.
REP. STENY HOYER (D-MD), House
Minority Whip:
The changing of those seven
votes resulted
in this House saying to the
president of the
United States, you cannot tell
contractors
that they cannot discriminate.
REP. PETE SESSIONS (R), Texas:
It is not unusual
to have people who vote and do
change their
vote. I have done that also. But
the rules
were followed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Democrats say a
provision in
a defense policy bill that
passed last night
would overturn a presidential
order that barred
LGBT bias. Republicans say the
provision simply
restates existing religious
liberties.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The Oklahoma
State Senate
voted today to make it a felony
for any doctor
to perform an abortion at any
stage of pregnancy.
It would be the first such law
anywhere in
the country. The bill goes now
to Governor
Mary Fallin, an anti-abortion
Republican.
She's so far withheld comment.
If she signs
it, abortion rights groups are
expected to
challenge the law in court.
JUDY WOODRUFF: NATO has formally
invited the
small Balkan country of
Montenegro to become
its 29th member. The move today
came over
Russia's strong objections.
Moscow opposes
the alliance expanding into
Eastern Europe.
A signing ceremony marked the
occasion at
NATO headquarters in Brussels.
The U.S. and
other member states still have
to approve
individually.
HARI SREENIVASAN: At least 220
families are
still missing in Sri Lanka after
deadly landslides
that buried three villages
there. Rescuers
spent another day digging into
the mud. The
head of the operation said
conditions and
continued rain are making it a
slow and painstaking
search.
MAJ. GEN. SUDANTHA RANASINGHE,
Sri Lanka:
It is completely covered in
thick mud. And
just the area is completely
boggy. The soldiers
are working there with mud up
above their
knees. In some places, it's
going even up
to their waist level.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Only 18 bodies
have been
recovered so far. More than
1,500 residents
in the hardest-hit areas are now
in shelters.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, California
is relaxing its grip on water
use, as a five-year
drought eases just a bit. The
state water
control board voted Wednesday to
lift a mandatory
conservation order. Instead,
local water districts
will set their own standards.
Parts of California
received near-average rain and
snow over the
winter.
HARI SREENIVASAN: California
lawmakers are
making another run at tougher
gun control.
The state Senate pushed through
nearly a dozen
new restrictions today. One bans
the sale
of assault-style weapons with
easily detachable
magazines. Another says owners
must turn in
magazines that hold more than 10
rounds. The
legislation now goes to the
state assembly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A Colorado movie
theater will
not be held liable for a mass
shooting in
2012 that killed 12 people.
Families of the
dead and survivors sued
Cinemark, saying that
its security was lax. But a
state court jury
sided with the company today.
The shooter,
James Holmes, opened fire during
a midnight
premiere of a Batman movie in
Aurora. He's
now serving a life sentence in
prison.
HARI SREENIVASAN: On Wall
Street, rising expectations
of an interest rate hike pushed
stocks lower.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 91 points
to close at 17435. The Nasdaq
fell 26 points,
and the S&P 500 slipped seven.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a fixture of
American journalism,
"60 Minutes" veteran Morley
Safer, died today
at his home in New York. He'd
retired just
last week. Safer spent more than
half-a-century
at CBS News, including 46 years
on "60 Minutes,"
longer than anyone else. His
career took off
in the tumult of the 1960s.
MORLEY SAFER, CBS News: The
Marines are burning
this old couple's cottage.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It was this
groundbreaking
reporting in Vietnam in 1965 by
a young Morley
Safer that launched a storied
career at CBS
News. His coverage of the
military's conduct
stunned viewers.
President Lyndon Johnson
suggested that Safer
had communist ties. In 2000, the
"NewsHour"
asked Safer if he expected that
kind of impact.
MORLEY SAFER: When I started
getting reaction
from the Marines in Vietnam
itself, in Da
Nang and other places, I
realized that this
was more than just another quite
brutal search-and-destroy
operation.
MIKE WALLACE, CBS News: I'm Mike
Wallace.
MORLEY SAFER: I'm Morley Safer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Safer joined 60
Minutes in
1970 and became known as an
intrepid storyteller.
He filed more than 900 stories,
his last this
past March. His droll touch and
breadth of
interests distinguished his
work, from playing
pool with Jackie Gleason and
interviewing
Dolly Parton, to traveling the
Orient Express,
while still staying true to his
investigative
roots.
His 1983 story about an
African-American man
named Lenell Geter serving life
for armed
robbery in Texas would become
one of the program's
most honored. Geter's conviction
was overturned
10 days after Safer's report
exposed a faulty
prosecution.
Jeff Fager, chairman of CBS News
and executive
producer of "60 Minutes," was a
longtime friend.
JEFF FAGER, CBS News: His life
at "60 Minutes,"
his life at CBS News had such an
impact on
all of us and how we cover
stories and the
kinds of stories he covered and
the most incredible
body of work.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Morley Safer is
survived by
his wife and daughter.
And Morley Safer was 84 years
old. He was
such a giant, Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes. What a
career.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
more on the
security concerns surrounding
the EgyptAir
flight; what Bernie Sanders and
Hillary Clinton
could do to bridge the growing
Democratic
divide; a Harvard program that
teaches baby
boomers to solve social
problems; and much
more.
We return to EgyptAir Flight 804
and what
could have happened to it.
Deborah Hersman served as
chairman of the
National Transportation Safety
Board from
2009 to 2014 and is now
president of the National
Safety Council, a nonprofit
organization devoted
to reducing preventable deaths
and injuries.
And Juan Zarate was deputy
national security
adviser for combating terrorism
during the
President George W. Bush
administration. He's
currently the chairman of the
Financial Integrity
Network, a consulting firm.
Deborah Hersman, I want to start
with you.
At this stage, what are
investigators thinking
about? What are they looking
for?
DEBORAH HERSMAN, Chairwoman,
National Transportation
Safety Board: Really, the first
24 hours,
they're focused on response,
recovery and
search for the aircraft, and so
you can see
clearly that's something that
was a focus
in this investigation.
But you want to gather any
perishable evidence
that might exist. You want to
make sure you
know who needs to be
interviewed, that you're
able to connect all of the dots
very early
in the investigation and grab
any of that
information.
Analyzing the radar data is
going to be important,
because what they need to do now
is pinpoint
where that aircraft is, so they
can identify
not just the aircraft, the parts
and take
care of the humans, but also get
those black
boxes, which are really
important to the investigation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Juan Zarate,
given what
little evidence has come out so
far, what
are the signs that point to fowl
play?
JUAN ZARATE, Former Deputy
National Security
Adviser: Well, there aren't many
signs.
And part of the reason you want
to gather
as much data and forensics as
possible early
on is try to give you clues. But
authorities
are indicating there weren't
signs in terms
of intelligence that a threat
was pending
or threatening this particular
airline or
this route.
There has been no claim of
responsibility
yet, and certainly we don't have
any evidence
that we have seen physically
that would demonstrate
this is terrorism. But we know
terrorists
have historically targeted
aircraft. It has
psychological, human and
economic impact.
We know that al-Qaida and ISIS
have been perfecting
technologies and trying to hit
us on aircraft
over the years, whether it's the
underwear
bomb plot out of Yemen, the shoe
and liquid
bomb plots out of the U.K., or
even the downing
of the Metrojet, the Russian
airliner out
of the Sinai by ISIS.
They have been trying to do
this. And they
have had expert bomb-makers
trying to figure
out ways of evading the security
technology
that we have, Ibrahim al-Asiri,
the master
bomb-maker in Yemen who has been
training
individuals for years, as well
as the Khorasan
group, a senior group of
al-Qaida figures
in Syria that up to 2014 were
trying to perfect
non-metallic devices that could
get on aircraft.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Deborah
Hersman, given the
laundry list that Juan Zarate
just went through,
and the fact that this is an
aircraft that
has a pretty good safety record,
that both
the pilots that were in the
cockpit have experience
flying this aircraft, does that
lead you to
think that maybe this wouldn't
be a mechanical
issue?
DEBORAH HERSMAN: You know, it's
so early in
the investigation, we really
don't have that
much factual information that is
specific
to this event.
And so it is, you know, really
speculation
at this point if anyone tries to
identify
what the cause is. There may be
people who
have deeper information within
the intelligence
community, but the information
that's been
released publicly -- in the
U.S., we investigate
as if it's an accident until we
find evidence
of criminal intent, and then
it's turned over
to the authorities and the FBI.
But, in this investigation,
there's not much
to go on, at least that's been
publicly shared
at this point.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Juan Zarate,
what about
those -- looking at the
different links in
the chain? Where are the
vulnerabilities?
Is it at the airport, is it in
transit, is
it the cargo holds?
Just recently, France got even
tighter about
airport security, which you
would think that
this would be less likely that
an attack was
somehow planned or planted
inside France.
JUAN ZARATE: You are right,
there are weak
links in the global airline
industry and system,
in terms of security.
First of all, no system is
perfect. And so
if you have terrorist actors
constantly trying
to probe defenses and innovate,
they're likely
to get through once in a while,
so that's
the reality.
But you also have to rely on
airport security
in third countries. It's part of
the reason
why the Department of Homeland
Security has
tried to forward-deploy some of
their assessments
and their security protocols,
vetting individuals
and cargo before it heads to the
United States.
But you have to rely on foreign
partners,
and capacity-building is
important. You also
have the insider threat problem.
You referred
to the French. The French had
revoked the
security clearance of about 50
individuals
at Charles de Gaulle last year
precisely because
of concerns.
And those are concerns that were
manifest
in the Sinai downing, as well as
the Mogadishu
airline attack which didn't
result in the
downing of the aircraft, but was
certainly
was an insider job. And,
finally, the new
technologies themselves. These
are very smart
individuals who have time and
space to operate.
And what I worry about, even
though we can't
-- we shouldn't speculate and we
can't definitively
say what has happened, is, you
have had a
quickening of the threats and
capabilities
from groups like ISIS, and
certainly an intent
to hit aircraft. And that's what
I think worries
individuals, especially when
France and Egypt
are involved.
They are prime targets for
jihadi groups.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Deborah
Hersman, it seems
that the terrorists are
deploying technology
faster than the aviation
industry is. And
what about the sort of global
web of satellites
and sensors that could tell us
where every
given aircraft is at any given
time, especially
after the Malaysian Air
disappearance?
DEBORAH HERSMAN: Yes, this
really started
back after Air France 447 in
2009.
That recovery operation took two
years and
cost $40 million. With Malaysia
in 2014, 370,
cost about that much in the
first month, and
so the real question that we
should be asking
is, why do we not have better
technology to
locate any aircraft where they
are?
I can locate my kids with their
iPhones anywhere
that they are. We need to have
need better
technology on aircraft. And NTSB
has recommended
that we not only have more
frequent sending
of location. They want it to be
sent once
every minute, so that we can
pinpoint location
better. They want those
recorders to last
not 30 days, but 90 days.
And they also have recommended
that an important
package of information, small
bit, small package
of data be sent that's
triggered, if there
is some event where you see a
deviation from
expected parameters, that you
would send some
information from the flight data
recorder,
so that you don't have to pull
that recorder
up from the bottom of the ocean
to know what's
going on.
So there's a lot of technology,
including
cockpit video recorders, that
hasn't been
taken advantage of that we could
do more with.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Deborah Hersman,
Juan Zarate, thank you both.
JUAN ZARATE: Thank you.
DEBORAH HERSMAN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to the race
for the White
House.
Democratic front-runner Hillary
Clinton didn't
mince words about the
presumptive Republican
nominee today. In an interview
with CNN, Clinton
said that Donald Trump is not
qualified to
be president.
Trump drew still other criticism
after he
responded early this morning to
the EgyptAir
crash with this tweet -- quote
-- "Looks like
yet another terrorist attack.
Airplane departed
from Paris. When will we get
tough, smart,
and vigilant? Great hate and
sickness!"
Clinton responded in the
interview, calling
Trump's comments reckless and
dangerous.
When asked about her Democratic
rival, Senator
Bernie Sanders, Clinton declared
the race
for the party's nomination over.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I will be the nominee for my
party, Chris.
That's already done, in effect.
There's no
way that I won't be.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But Bernie
Sanders has declared
that he will keep up the fight
on through
the last primaries and bring his
message to
the convention in Philadelphia.
So, what does that mean for the
Democrats'
chance in the fall?
I'm joined by longtime
Democratic strategist
and professor of politics at
University of
Southern California Bob Shrum.
Bob Shrum, thank you very much
for being with
us.
After Hillary Clinton said that
today, I want
to read to you just a portion of
what the
Sanders camp put out within the
last hour.
They said: "We expect voters in
the remaining
contests will disagree, as we
do, with what
she said." He said -- they say
that: "Senator
Sanders is doing much better
than Hillary
Clinton against Donald Trump in
national and
state polls. It is clear that
millions of
Americans have growing doubts
about the Clinton
campaign."
What do you make of what is
going on in the
Sanders camp?
BOB SHRUM, Democratic
Strategist: Well, it's
not just the Sanders camp.
This is a kind of natural
back-and-forth that
goes on at the end of these
primary periods,
when someone who is behind wants
to keep making
the case. We went through it in
2008. And
some of what Hillary Clinton
said was pretty
tough. Some of what Barack Obama
said was
pretty tough, but they managed
to put things
together afterwards.
And I think there is a basis for
doing that
here. I think we will get to
that point. But
to expect someone who is still
running in
these primaries, who is trying
to win a number
of them, and who has a chance to
win some
of them, to say, oh, yes, I sort
of agree
with all of this, is a false
expectation.
Hillary Clinton didn't do it.
Bernie Sanders
won't do it, but, in the end, I
think they
will get together.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is it the right
thing for her
to do to say right now, I am the
nominee?
BOB SHRUM: Well, she is
mathematically the
nominee. And the way she was
asked that question,
I don't think she could have
given any other
answer.
One of the interesting things
is, I saw her
interview characterized as a
warning to Sanders.
I thought it was an invitation.
She was saying,
I will do my part to unify the
party, he has
to do his part.
And, by the way, he's doing her
a couple of
favors right now. One of the
biggest ones
is, he's not on television in
California.
She's ahead here. If he went on
television
-- I think he has the money to
do it -- he
would threaten that in a serious
way, and
she would have to spend a lot of
money to
try to counter it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You mean not on
television
in terms of paid advertising.
BOB SHRUM: Yes, not on
television in terms
of paid advertising.
The weakness of my old
consulting background,
you say go on TV, you mean buy
TV ads.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Bob Shrum, you
have watched
politics for a long time. What
do you think
Bernie Sanders wants as this
point?
BOB SHRUM: Well, I think he
probably still
wants the nomination. I don't
think that's
going to happen. He wants to
influence the
party's platform.
And I think there's a basis for
the two of
them to agree on things like the
minimum wage,
on debt-free college, if not
free college
for everybody. And I think he
probably wants
some reforms in the nominating
process.
Like, when he says open the
party up and let
the people in, I think what he
means is independents
should be able to vote in all
primaries. I
suspect he would also like to
get rid of -- get
rid of or modify the
superdelegate system.
And, frankly, that shouldn't be
a problem
for Secretary Clinton. She won't
need those
superdelegates in 2020 to get
renominated.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I saw a
poll today, somebody
quoting a poll saying that,
right now, something
like 60 percent of Bernie
Sanders supporters
have an unfavorable view of
Hillary Clinton.
To what extent is what he's
doing potentially
going to hurt her campaign in
the fall, if
she's the nominee?
BOB SHRUM: Well, at this point,
I don't see
the kind of sulfurous criticism
of her that
would hurt in the fall.
You know, as I said, there was a
lot of back-and-forth
at the end of 2008. There was a
group called
the PUMAs who said -- women who
said they'd
never vote for Barack Obama.
Almost all of
them did.
So, I think the heat of passion
at the moment
cools off. I think that Hillary
Clinton will
want Bernie Sanders to have a
role at the
convention, and to help bring
the Sanders
people along, and I think that
will happen.
And I think Sanders is conscious
that he's
brought so many new people into
the process,
that they're going to be around
for a long
time, and that they're going to
have real
influence. That's part of his
legacy. He doesn't
want his legacy to be, I'm
pretty sure, that
he helped elect Donald Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You don't think
then -- I heard
what you said about you don't
hear the kind
of sulfurous language.
But in looking again at the
Sanders campaign
statement this afternoon, they
said it's clear
millions of Americans have
growing doubts
about the Clinton campaign.
BOB SHRUM: Well, that's the kind
of thing
you say at the end of the
process when you're
behind.
I think Hillary Clinton made an
argument in
2008 that she would be a much
stronger general
election candidate than Barack
Obama would
be, and that he might very well
lose to John
McCain.
I just think it's kind of
natural. I think
we're intrigued by it, in part
because she
has won the nomination, in part
because he
has mounted such a vigorous
challenge, and
in part because the Republican
process is
over, and all the attention is
shifted to
the Democrats.
But I will bet that, at the end
of the day,
we have a convention where we
may have a roll
call, and at some point in the
roll call,
Bernie Sanders will stand up and
move to nominate
Hillary Clinton by acclamation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Bob Shrum,
joining us from
California, somebody who has
been watching
American politics for a long
time, we thank
you very much.
BOB SHRUM: Thanks. Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
modern-day echoes
of Stalin-era deportations; the
future of
genetics, for better and for
worse; and a
hip-hop artist on why he doesn't
cater to
the whims of the music industry.
But first: business leaders
launching second
careers to address social
problems like poor
nutrition and food waste.
Economics correspondent Paul
Solman looks
at a program at Harvard
University teaching
former executives how to do
good.
It's part of our weekly Making
Sense report,
which airs every Thursday on the
"NewsHour."
PAUL SOLMAN: At Daily Table in
food desert
Dorchester, Massachusetts,
apples for just
69 cents a pound, fresh salmon
for less than
$3, top-flight food at
rock-bottom prices.
DOUG RAUCH, Founder, Daily
Table: We have
got massive amounts of wasted
food, and, at
the same time, we have got 49
million Americans
that can't afford to eat
properly.
PAUL SOLMAN: Doug Rauch opened
this nonprofit
store after 30 years at Trader
Joe's, the
last 14 as president.
So, is this food all rejects,
seconds?
DOUG RAUCH: Every single product
in the store
is a quality product that was
either excess
inventory, a shorter code, so we
don't sell
anything past its code date, or
it's something
we made at a special buy on,
something that
is maybe the product has been
discontinued
or the label has changed, these
sorts of deals.
PAUL SOLMAN: Americans waste
some 133 billion
pounds of food a year.
Supermarket chains
play a role by tossing products
within 30
days of the sell-by date if they
can't ship
them to stores quickly enough.
DOUG RAUCH: Here's an item from
Stonyfield
that is April 19. So, that still
has 12 days
on it from now.
PAUL SOLMAN: Right.
DOUG RAUCH: And yet we're
selling this for
99 cents for a six-pack. This
gives people
in the community a chance to
provide their
family with yogurt that they
never would have
been able to afford.
PAUL SOLMAN: Daily Table wants
to appeal to
members of this community who
may be too embarrassed
to take handouts from food banks
or soup kitchens.
DOUG RAUCH: There's something
inherent in
a donor-recipient relationship
which is a
power differential. Here, we
have flipped
it. Because they get to be
customers, we got
to earn their patronage, and
they come to
experience that in a
neighborhood where they
get to feel better when they
walk out instead
of in any way slightly lessened.
PAUL SOLMAN: Retired at age 57,
this is Rauch's
second act, thanks to a quirky
fellowship
at the Harvard Business School.
ROSABETH MOSS KANTER, Harvard
Business School:
It actually took him a while to
hone in on
the concept.
PAUL SOLMAN: Rosabeth Moss
Kanter runs the
Advanced Leadership Initiative
for ex-execs
intent on solving social
problems.
ROSABETH MOSS KANTER: He was
interested in
food waste, he was interested in
hunger, he
was interested all over the
place. And we
gave him contacts, we gave him
ideas, we gave
him feedback. You don't do it
instantly.
PAUL SOLMAN: Kanter envisioned
the potential
eight years ago: millions of
high-powered
baby boomers like Rauch nearing
retirement
age.
ROSABETH MOSS KANTER: We said,
hey, here is
a leadership force, and if we
could only deploy
them to work on these pressing
problems of
water, and climate, and health,
and education,
and conflict, and rights, maybe
that's a perfect
match, because these baby
boomers were going
to live 20 to 30 more years, be
productive,
be healthy, and most
institutions had never
taken that into account.
PAUL SOLMAN: This year, 47
retirees have returned
to school with lofty resumes,
and ambitions
to match.
SUNEEL KAMLANI, Advanced
Leadership Initiative
Fellow: I'm interested in
establishing what
I'm going to call the Acela
Corridor Infrastructure
Bank.
PAUL SOLMAN: Suneel Kamlani,
former chief
operating officer at investment
bank UBS,
plans to hook up building
projects with cash-heavy
funders.
SUNEEL KAMLANI: The country's
infrastructure
is crumbling. Conversely, the
private sector
has a significant amount of
capital.
PAUL SOLMAN: Biotech
entrepreneur Ken Kelley
wondered why there was no
vaccine for the
deadly Ebola virus.
KEN KELLEY, Advanced Leadership
Initiative
Fellow: It became almost an
intellectual itch
inside my brain that I had to
address.
PAUL SOLMAN: It turned out many
diseases just
aren't big enough to attract
industry or government
funding. So Kelley is developing
a public-private
partnership and a global
investment fund.
KEN KELLEY: To have vaccines and
drugs available
for neglected tropical diseases
before they
become pandemic threats.
ROSABETH MOSS KANTER: We
encourage the fellows
to think really big, bigger than
they thought
they could when they came in.
Don't just think outside of the
box. You know,
be creative. Think outside the
building.
PAUL SOLMAN: It's the job of the
program to
help fellows figure out how to
put their ideas
into action. There are seminars.
ROSABETH MOSS KANTER: The whole
point of this
year is that you have been asked
to stand
back and reflect and not just
repeat what
you have been doing.
PAUL SOLMAN: Instead, fellows
network, collaborate.
WOMAN: Why don't your other
cohorts agree
with your position?
PAUL SOLMAN: And go to class.
Carol Hallquist
is working on an online hub
connecting schools
with retiree helpers.
WOMAN: Larry, Pat and I have
been meeting
about our projects on urban
education. And
we're thinking about how we
finance our projects
differently, especially because
of the two
case studies.
ROSABETH MOSS KANTER: Pat,
you're nodding.
WOMAN: I am. Just having worked
with Carol
and Larry and the team, it's
fascinating how
ideas generate through our
dialogue.
PAUL SOLMAN: And then there's
the homework.
LYNNE WINES, Advanced Leadership
Initiative
Fellow: It's been quite a few
years since
I have had to write a term
paper, and I, on
spring break, had to write a
term paper.
PAUL SOLMAN: Former banker Lynne
Wines wants
to help adults with cognitive
disabilities
find jobs.
LYNNE WINES: Somebody with
dyslexia may not
be able to take a written test
or submit a
written application, but they
may be the best
employee that they ever had.
PAUL SOLMAN: The upshot of this
program? Turn
ideas into viable ventures, like
Doug Rauch's
Daily Table.
DOUG RAUCH: We put in a kitchen
because people
need to be able to grab
ready-to-eat meals
that they can take home and
serve to their
family. What they told us was,
they don't
have any time. So we provide
them meals that
in three to five minutes they
can heat up
that are delicious, nutritious,
and affordable.
They get to see food being
produced. They
get to watch product being made
right there
by people in their community.
And it removes
any question, like, where did
this come from
and how can you have it so
cheap?
PAUL SOLMAN: To start, Daily
Table has relied
on donations, but Rauch thinks
ventures like
this need to pay for themselves.
DOUG RAUCH: We hope, and we're
starting to
prove, that you can get to a
break-even spot
where then a store can keep
going without
additional philanthropic
support. If this
is true and we can actually show
this to work,
then it becomes scalable.
PAUL SOLMAN: Rauch is already
scouting a second
Boston location and plans to
take Daily Table
to a new city next year, just
one of more
than 200 graduates of the
Harvard Advanced
Leadership Program embarking on
an encore
career, and please forgive the
cliche, trying
to make the world a better
place.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
economics
correspondent Paul Solman in
Boston, Massachusetts.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Advanced
Leadership Initiative
fellows pay a fee to participate
in the program
, though some financial fee is
available.
Harvard University wouldn't
disclose the exact
amount, but reports put the fee
at more than
$50,000.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It's been more
than two
years since Russia invaded the
Ukrainian territory
of Crimea, home to a Muslim
population that
has suffered greatly through the
centuries.
Since the invasion, they are
under pressure
once more.
From Kiev, special correspondent
Kira Kay
reports, our story produced in
partnership
with the Bureau for
International Reporting.
KIRA KAY: Here in the main
mosque of Ukraine's
capital, Kiev, Imam Seram Arifov
leads Friday
prayers for the city's Muslims,
but he is
more than 500 miles from his
home in Simferopol,
Crimea.
IMAM SERAM ARIFOV, Ukraine
(through translator):
I was a teacher. We had a
private school.
We were teaching the Islamic
religious sciences.
We also taught the Koran. I had
to leave my
homeland to continue my job in
more acceptable
conditions. We could not work in
Crimea anymore.
They didn't let the school
operate. They didn't
renew our license.
KIRA KAY: "They" are the
Russians, who invaded
and annexed Crimea in march
2014. The imam
and about 100 members of the
congregation
are Crimean Tatars, a small
Muslim community
with centuries of history in the
region.
But many found themselves on the
wrong side
of the new authorities, and now
they have,
in effect, become refugees in
their own country.
This young mother is one of
them.
WOMAN (through translator): I
had to quit
my studies. I was studying there
in high school,
but I had to grab my documents
and come here.
All our loved ones are still in
Crimea. We
are far away from our parents.
And it's difficult
to be away from our homeland.
KIRA KAY: Protests in Ukraine
led to the ouster
of pro-Russian President Viktor
Yanukovych
in early 2014, but Russia,
unhappy with the
loss of Yanukovych, took
advantage of the
turmoil, reclaiming territory it
considered
its own.
A referendum was held in March
2014. Russian
authorities say 96 percent of
Crimean voters
supported the annexation.
But Refat Chubarov, the
political leader of
the Crimean Tatars, believes
many Crimean
residents were too intimidated
by the heavy
presence of Russian troops to
express their
true feelings.
REFAT CHUBAROV, Chairman, The
Mejlis of the
Crimean Tatar People (through
translator):
The only ones who spoke out
openly against
such a fake referendum were
Crimean Tatars.
We understood that Crimea faced
a new problem,
a terrible one. Moscow never
came to Crimea
with good intentions.
KIRA KAY: The Crimean Tatars
already had a
long history of conflict with
Russia, going
back even before the Soviet
Union. Then, during
World War II, nearly the entire
population
was forcefully deported
thousands of miles
away by communist dictator
Joseph Stalin.
Ukraine says more than 100,000
people died
in what it considers a genocide.
That history resurfaced
dramatically last
week, when a Ukrainian woman of
Crimean Tatar
descent won a Pan-European sing
contest watched
by tens of millions. Her winning
song memorialized
the 1944 deportation of the
Tatars. Only after
the Soviet Union dissolved in
the 1990s and
Ukraine became its own country
did the bulk
of Crimea's Tatars return, with
the hopes
of starting over.
Gulnara Izetovna's family
resettled and had
just finished building their new
house. But
after the referendum, Gulnara
was stopped
by authorities when returning
from a trip.
GULNARA IZETOVNA, Ukraine
(through translator):
They asked about my nationality.
I was accused
of separatism and they
interrogated me.
KIRA KAY: Izetovna fled, as have
an estimated
30,000 other Crimean Tatars.
GULNARA IZETOVNA (through
translator): Living
now in the 21st century, I never
thought that
this could happen again. What my
parents felt
during World War II is the same
thing I feel
now.
KIRA KAY: Ukraine is an
overwhelmingly Christian
country. The Orthodox Church
plays a strong
role in life here. But the
annexation of Crimea,
and the Russian support of
separatists in
the east of the country, has
created a shared
enemy and made Ukraine more
welcoming of thousands
of Muslim refugees than some
other parts of
Europe.
Still, it has been a difficult
process, says
aid worker Enver Bekirov.
ENVER BEKIROV, Aid Worker
(through translator):
There were many large families
of Crimean
Tatars, families with sick
people, disabled
people. We just decided to take
the responsibility.
KIRA KAY: Bekirov ensures the
displaced have
proper clothing and food, and
helps them find
housing that various refugee
agencies also
pay for.
When Lenie Bilial fled Crimea,
she was pregnant
with her sixth child. She and
her husband,
Mustafa, had wanted to stay in
Crimea, but
felt repressed because of their
faith.
MUSTAFA BILIAL, Ukraine (through
translator):
We are Muslims, and this is very
important
to us. What is happening in
Russia, we see
that Muslims are being
persecuted. They come
and break into these educational
establishments.
They include certain literature
on the blacklist.
I worry, for example, the Koran
or other books
might end up on the list.
KIRA KAY: Today, they feel
welcomed by their
new neighbors, but also not
fully at home.
Back in Crimea, Russian
authorities are now
intensifying their crackdown on
the Tatars,
arresting activists and
community leaders
by using anti-extremist laws.
Others have
been abducted, including this
man, who was
filmed being taken by a
pro-Russian militia
and was later found dead with
signs of torture.
The Crimean Tatars' governing
body, the Mejlis,
has been banned. They are now
functioning
in exile. Leader Refat Chubarov
has himself
been indicted by Crimean
prosecutors for violating
Russia's territorial integrity
by continuing
to insist Crimea is part of
Ukraine.
GEOFFREY PYATT, U.S. Ambassador
to Ukraine:
This is a moderate Muslim
community that was
victimized once before under
Stalin and is
now being victimized under the
Russian occupation
of Crimea.
KIRA KAY: Geoffrey Pyatt is the
American ambassador
to Ukraine. The U.S. has
sanctions against
Russia because of the Crimean
annexation.
Pyatt says that amidst the
diplomatic pressure
and war of words, Crimea's
Tatars shouldn't
be overshadowed.
GEOFFREY PYATT: Crimea is not
going to be
returned to Ukrainian
sovereignty over the
short-term. And the Tatar
community understands
that. To have a community like
the Tatars,
which is notably tolerant,
notably inclusive,
makes it even more important
that we not allow
their story to be forgotten.
KIRA KAY: Recently, Crimean
Tatars have taken
dramatic steps to make sure they
aren't forgotten.
Last year, they created a
blockade of the
roads leading from Ukraine into
Crimea, jamming
an economic lifeline.
And activists believed to
include Crimean
Tatars blew up the power lines
still serving
Crimea, plunging the peninsula
into darkness
for weeks. But most Crimean
Tatars acknowledge
they won't be going home any
time soon, including
journalist Osman Pashayev, who
had been detained
while covering commemorations of
the historic
deportation.
So, he and his entire news staff
also went
into exile. Their small
operation keeps the
flow of free information, both
for the community
in exile and those back home.
OSMAN PASHAYEV, Editor, ATR
Television (through
translator): We're looking
something to keep
that connection. We have to be
relevant to
our audience, and we must avoid
that the annexation
becomes permanent.
KIRA KAY: But with every passing
day, that
connection may become harder to
keep.
This is Kira Kay for "PBS
NewsHour" in Kiev,
Ukraine.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It seems as if
there are important
breakthroughs each year in the
field of genetics
and medicine. In many ways, we
indeed could
be on the verge of historical
changes in how
we use DNA and how we edit our
biological
code.
But the moment can be deceptive.
The history
of genetics is long and
complicated, dating
back to the mid-19th century.
It's full of
exciting discoveries, endless
mysteries and
even nefarious intent.
That's the ambitious scope of a
new book,
"The Gene: An Intimate History."
Its author
is Dr. Siddhartha Mukherjee, a
cancer physician
and an assistant professor of
medicine at
Columbia University. He's the
author of the
Pulitzer Prize-winning "The
Emperor of All
Maladies: A Biography of
Cancer."
Dr. Siddhartha Mukherjee,
welcome to the "NewsHour"
again.
DR. SIDDHARTHA MUKHERJEE,
Author, "The Gene:
An Intimate History": Pleasure
to be here.
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, an intimate
history within
what? Just a short time after
you have come
out with this award-winning book
on cancer,
you tackle an arguably more
complicated subject,
the gene, and there is a
personal connection.
Explain that.
DR. SIDDHARTHA MUKHERJEE: Well,
this book
took actually a long time to
write. It was
-- it took six years to write
this book.
And the book gets intimate right
from the
first page. The story opens
really with an
exploration that was in the back
of my mind
where I -- as I was growing up.
It was about
my family's mental illness, two
uncles consumed
by schizophrenia and bipolar
disease, and
then, one generation later,
another, so, on
the same side of the family,
also diagnosed
with schizophrenia and
institutionalized,
and the growing realization in
my mind as
a child that this wasn't --
there was some
heredity lurking, that genes
were lurking
behind mental illness, and that
coming to
fullness as I started to study
medicine and
realize that there was a genetic
core to all
of this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You sense, in
reading this
book, that there is an urgency
to this, that
you felt it was important to get
this done
now. Why?
DR. SIDDHARTHA MUKHERJEE: It's
important to
get this done now because we are
at the -- on
the verge of unveiling or
discovering and
inventing astonishing new
technologies that
allow us to read and write human
genomes.
And let me explain what I mean.
By read, I
mean we can now begin to scan
the human genome,
your genome, mine, all the genes
that you
and I have, and ask questions
about what it
predicts for us in the future.
The technology is far from
accurate, but,
for instance, the risk of breast
cancer may
be present in a variation in
your genome.
And by write, I mean something
even more strange,
which is that, lately -- and
this has been
widely covered, but, lately, we
have been
able to -- scientists have been
able to go
into the human genome and make
intentional
alterations, erase genes, change
genes, change
their content, et cetera.
That's a surprising thing to do
and portends
a very, very complex landscape
for the future.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you do get to
some of these
very tough questions.
But you also -- you really go
back through
the history of genetics, all the
way back
to Aristotle and even before
that, I guess,
Pythagoras, move ahead to
Charles Darwin.
There are a number of figures
along the way
you spend time on.
Is one of them more important
than all the
others?
DR. SIDDHARTHA MUKHERJEE: Well,
they're all
important. This is a story
knitted together
with other stories.
And I wanted to keep things
simple enough,
so that all readers could get --
you know,
the average reader, I could
understand what
the lineage of inventions and
discoveries
was.
One of the most important
figures, of course,
is Gregor Mendel, a monk who
sort of persisted
with his experiments on pea
flowers and pea
plants, and just using those
very, very simple
experiments really brought out
what was at
that time a revolutionary
understanding that
units of carrying hereditary
traits or features
were moving between parents and
their children.
That was a striking -- a
striking and original
observation, so striking, so
original, Judy,
that he -- that it was lost, the
paper was
lost. No one even remembered it
for 40 years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And his story is
so personal.
You write about all the
disappointments he
had. He was trying to pass an
exam, never
passed it.
DR. SIDDHARTHA MUKHERJEE: Twice,
failed twice.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Twice, twice,
which I think
may be a lesson for a lot of
people.
DR. SIDDHARTHA MUKHERJEE: I
know.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Young people
today worrying
about passing their exams.
You also of course -- and we
suggested this
a moment ago -- get into the
darker side of
genetics, the movement or
efforts along the
way to tailor and fix the human
progress in
a way that's negative and
dangerous.
Why do you think that effort
didn't -- it
was bad enough, but why do you
think it got
as far as it did?
DR. SIDDHARTHA MUKHERJEE: Well,
the road to
that particular hell is paved
with -- actually
was paved with progressive
intentions.
I mean, that's what's
interesting about the
story. We forget it. We have
forgotten that,
that when the idea of eugenics
was invented,
the idea that you could improve
the human
race by better breeding, when it
was invented,
it was actually invented in
England by Francis
Galton, Darwin's cousin.
And a lot of progressives, not
all, but a
lot of progressives signed on to
it and thought
that it was really great to
improve the human
race by selective breeding.
Now, what is amazing about is
that that idea
metastasizes to America, to our
shores, and
becomes, you know -- that
selective human
breeding becomes selective human
sterilization,
Carrie Buck, a woman...
JUDY WOODRUFF: To whom you
dedicate the book,
along with your grandmother.
DR. SIDDHARTHA MUKHERJEE: To
whom I dedicate
the book, along with my
grandmother.
Carrie Buck was sterilized for
eugenic reasons.
Oliver Wendell Holmes, the great
judicial
moderate, said three generations
of imbeciles
is enough. So, we were allowed
-- the state
was allowed to sterilize Carrie
Buck on that
pretext.
And then it metastasizes again
to Nazi Germany,
where it takes on the most
macabre form, moving
from breeding, to sterilization,
to ultimately
to extermination. Of course, we
remember the
Nazi Germany, but we forget that
this was
our problem, too. This was not
only their
problem. This is something that
arose out
of a very particularly moment in
American
history.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You write -- you
take genetics,
Siddhartha Mukherjee , all the
way to today,
practically, and the inventions
that are coming
and the discoveries that are
coming almost
at rate, a daily pace, and yet
you do signal
the limits of this.
It feels as if, just a few years
ago, people
were thinking, oh, we're going
to solve all
our medical mysteries with the
genome. But
it isn't that simple, is it?
DR. SIDDHARTHA MUKHERJEE: It is
not that simple.
It's very important to remember
what parts
are simple and not. Otherwise,
we need this
vocabulary. This is a vast
public debate,
and it cannot be had within the
laboratory
or in tissue culture rooms or in
medical boardrooms.
It has to had in a wide public
place as possible.
But things are more complicated,
because your
genes predict the future, but
not in an absolute
sense, not in a one-to-one
sense. In other
words, there is still a striking
role of chance,
a striking role of the
environment. It's chance,
plus genes, plus environments,
and these interactions
between them that make you and
me.
And the gene predict a little
bit in some
cases, a lot in other cases. And
we need to
figure out what I what. We need
to appropriately
match where genes are useful and
where genes
can be misleading.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what -- how
should we think
about genetics right now Should
we think that
there is still so much more to
be discovered
that can make a huge difference,
or that we're
coming closer to the end of what
there is
to be known?
DR. SIDDHARTHA MUKHERJEE: I
think both of
these things can be true at the
same time.
There is a vast cosmos yet to be
discovered.
How do genes manage to make, you
know, a human
being?
And yet there are things that we
already know
that are very important. We know
that we can
predict with certain levels of
fidelity whether
you will have a heightened risk
for certain
illnesses, cancer, potentially
Alzheimer's
disease, potentially other
diseases. We can
begin to predict that risk.
So, the question is -- it's a
very uneasy
time, because, simultaneously,
we're being
able to, as I said before, read
and write
the genome with a limited
capacity, but also
projecting forward into the
future, understanding
that there's a whole new
landscape that needs
to be figured out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it was only
a short time
from the book on cancer to the
book on the
gene. So I'm assuming you have
already started
on the next one.
DR. SIDDHARTHA MUKHERJEE: Oh, I
have not.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Dr. Siddhartha
Mukherjee.
The book is "The Gene: An
Intimate History."
Thank you very much.
DR. SIDDHARTHA MUKHERJEE: Thank
you for having
me.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally,
another installment
in our Brief But Spectacular
series, where
we ask interesting people to
describe their
passions.
Tonight, we hear from hip-hop
artist Jared
Pellerin, who's better known by
his stage
name, Pell, on how beauty can be
born of hardship
and what he discovers making
music he calls
experimental soul.
JARED PELLERIN, Musician:
Sometimes, I feel
like a true masterpiece is made
from making
a mistake beautiful.
I first started making music
when I was around
16 in Jackson, Mississippi,
because I was
forced to move there after
Hurricane Katrina
with my brother and mother.
I remember making friends by
making music
because, being in a new social
situation,
it's always a good thing to be
able to identify
yourself with something, and I
identified
myself as an artist.
I have a lot of musical
influences, Kanye
West, Pharrell William, Frank
Ocean, Stevie
Wonder. I listen to Stevie when
I feel like
I'm in love or I feel like I
want to do better
in the world, because there's a
lot of positivity
in his music.
I would describe my music as
experimental
soul. And some of the best music
to me is
that that comes out of accident.
Maybe that
one drum hit that didn't sound
right, if left
in there and mixed the perfect
way, can provide
the ear candy for a classic.
"Runaway" is one of my favorite
tracks, because
it deals with having to leave
something that
you know and chasing your own
path and dream.
That's how you get the message.
"That's how you get the message,
when I no
longer can text you. Hear our
past on every
record because it's way too hard
forgetting.
All the teachings in the world
can't force
another lesson, that it's better
you're a
ghost within my presence. But I
still remember
you just as a blessing, I'm
confessing."
Being in the music industry, you
are confronted
with a bunch of challenges
creatively, because
you will have people telling you
what you
should be talking about, when
the goal of
an artist is to tell their
story.
I should try to challenge myself
to bring
something new to the culture,
because that's
how it keeps pushing forward.
The way music
streaming is now and the trends
that it's
starting to show in our
listeners' attention,
I feel that people are more
receptive to singles
and not listening to albums as
much.
When you drop an album, you're
not dropping
a bunch of loose singles. You're
dropping
a cohesive story or a cohesive
body of work
sonically that you want somebody
to be able
to digest, sit with, maybe play
a few times.
It takes a lot to make an album.
You're putting
your whole soul into a body of
work that is
something that needs to be
enjoyed in its
completeness.
And when you take away that
aspect and you
want to, you know, pitch this
single or this
single, and not really have
anybody focus
on the album, you take away from
what the
point of the music is, you know?
What's up? My name is Jared
Pellerin, AKA
Pell. And this is my Brief But
Spectacular
take on experimental soul.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Jared's is
just one in our
Brief But Spectacular series.
You can find
that on our Web site at
PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: Meet some of the leading
scientists who
are tackling the Zika virus
outbreak. Find
their answers to frequently
asked questions
about microcephaly in infants
and whether
the outbreak is getting worse.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And that's the
"NewsHour"
for tonight. I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening with Mark Shields and
David Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.